Hey there, welcome to ppmo (the book). Through whatever way you found yourself here, maybe a recommendation, random link or via any other method, you are lucky to have such an opportunity present itself by mere chance.

This is a guide to help you gain control over your life, and to realize your potential. This is a book detailing about the practice of leaving pornography and masturbation in favor of the benefits it provides. There is so much potential within yourself that can be unlocked once porn and masturbation is left, and with every cell in my body, I wish for you to complete this text, as I truly believe that it will change your life.

One understanding I want you to have is that you need to approach this in a way of understanding. This is no how-to. Even though this is a 'guide' you should approach this as a way of understanding, not blind belief. I want you to make understandings within yourself so you can make your own decisions.

Also, before we get started, you should understand this: **DO NOT skip chapters.** This book has been crafted to help you quit without any friction, and if you skip over critical information, you only have yourself to blame for any failures, so read everything as attentively as possible.

> Just for context, within this book, all instances referring to NoFap are not referring to the subreddit or website, but are referring to the practice of PMO/MO*.

**P/MO Definition: `Porn, Masturbation & Orgasm`** - When used in writing, PMO can also refer to fapping on its own.

**User Definiton: `Somebody that uses porn or faps.`**

## The Sad World Of Nofap
Most of us stumbled across nofap in a similar way. Maybe through a YouTube video that randomly popped up in our suggestion feed, or through a link our friend sent us, or even through a meme. Whatever the case is, it intrigues us hearing what nofap is. We hear that what seemed like a supposedly normal activity, that nearly all males (and a lot of females) practice in the current day and age, is harmful.

Most people join the bandwagon of porn, as most people use it so 'it must be fine', denouncing any evidence proving them wrong as they would rather be blissful in ignorance than living in truth. However, nothing can escape the fact that PMO has numerous negative effects on the 'casual' user and 'heavy' user alike.

Negative effects span from low energy, low motivation, lessened ability to do work, lowered respect for women, depression, anxiety when interacting with others, porn-induced erectile dysfunction, relationship problems, acne, lowered testosterone, obsession with porn and fantasies, questioning sexuality in spite of no previous interest, and more. A lot of people believe nofap to provide benefits, but it is actually just the negatives of fapping itself being removed.

These effects are not anecdotal, and they do not happen to a minority of people. All users of porn suffer some degree of these symptoms, no matter if they realize it. Like the 'boiling frog', if a change occurs slowly and we are not knowledgeable of it, we are unlikely to notice it. A huge amount of problems in our personal lives could be directly or indirectly related to porn, yet we may be none the wiser. However, there is not much point proving these negative effects, as the neurochemical effects of porn are pretty well understood, from dopamine desensitization, opioid release (climax), lowered testosterone, and other chemical changes. Just ask any ex-user that has been fully freed from fapping, mentally. Unless they thought they would be able to levitate using nofap, they are likely to explain the positive changes they have experienced after leaving.

So, let's return to the idea that we have discovered nofap through a YouTube video. Hundreds of YouTubers have made videos on quitting porn and masturbation, with thousands of videos giving advice on quitting. However, there lies a sad truth in between the lines that the average viewer is oblivious to. Most advice given by these 'self-development' YouTubers/mentors has an incredibly low success rate.

The reason for this is because people approach PMO like a habit rather than an addiction. Habits are hard to break, but can be broken with motivation. Addictions on the other hand, can never be fixed with motivation. They also use motivation as the primary factor for doing nofap. MOTIVATION IS TEMPORARY. When you want to start something, often motivation is a good starting point, but motivation never leads to consistence. Nearly all popular advice uses motivation as the basis, which leads to the user having an incentive which easily disappears, leading them right back into the trap. Sustainability comes from a true desire and intrinsic motivation to improve yourself. Therefore, motivation should not be used as a basis for leaving.

Think of most life problems. As humans, we have the ability to connect the dots, to figure out a way to solve our problems. Some people are better at this than others, but all of us have some level of this ability. However, when it comes to addiction, our brain struggles to process it. It seems simple, just quit porn, right? Just explain all of the negative effects of porn, the potential depression, the brain fog, the X, Y and Z. Yet, as most people starting out nofap soon know, they realize how little control they really have over themselves, and their addiction.

The empty fulfillment that porn provides tricks the brain into an addiction, even in knowledge that it is a trick of experiencing real sex. It is like one part of our brain knows we are fooling ourselves, and the other part does not, like some sort of angel and devil on each shoulder. What once seems like a habit started through novel curiosity soon leads us into an addiction that causes us negatives.

For those that have tried and failed to quit porn and/or masturbation knows the cycle. When we are about to make the decision to quit porn, we feel inspired, motivated, angry, excited, a wide range of emotions. We are on the verge of getting loads of benefits as others have said. But as time goes on, our initial motivation runs out and we become agitated. Soon enough, it seems like we lose full control of ourselves and relapse. We relapse and fail in spite of all the negative effects, in spite of all motivation that we had at the beginning, and in spite of every desire to leave. Unfortunately, for most of those trying to quit PMO forever, they know this cycle too well.

Those who continuously fail may read the same book or strategy over and over again, without anything changing. A quote that summarizes this well is from a villain in Far Cry 3 - "The definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result". I am not insinuating that you are insane, but that doing the same thing so many times with the same result is pointless. If you repeat something many times to no avail, you are misunderstanding or missing a reality. Keep this in mind.

Let's look at the bigger picture. In communities where empty motivation and basic strategies are used against addiction, how can you expect these 'strategies' to work? PMO is an addiction, not a habit, because most can't leave even if they have every desire to do so. Most of the people giving advice online are giving failing advice whether they know it or not, and these advisories keep pushing 'solutions' that do not work. If these people giving advice used the same strategies in a professional setting, they would be shut down immediately! To solve addiction, you need an understanding of some key mental concepts, to gain **control** and **power** over your reactions and fate. Without full control and understanding of how these components relate to each other, we can never expect to help people quit porn once and for all, in larger numbers.

Addiction to porn and masturbation is a battle between components of the mind. It is the internal battle for control that is fought so hard, yet lost so frequently, leaving many feeling hopeless. The logical part of our brain (the pre-frontal cortex, which represents our true self the most) has the desire to leave the addiction once and for all. But little do we know, that the primitive part of our brain (the amygdala) is the part of the brain that blindly wants addiction to continue. So we must have an understanding of our brain.

But why do people complain about PMO more than any other addiction? This is for the simple fact that it is embarrassing to talk about. Due to human nature and shame, it is often kept under wraps, getting slowly worse over years, trapping the user for the rest of their entire lives. It is hard to approach friends and family about it because it would seem weird and it would be incredibly awkward. This is the part of it that is most likely the worse. Those in addictions to smoking, food, drugs, and other instant pleasures can approach others and can relatively easily find professionals to fix their issues. Societies can criticize the people producing what causes the addiction, and then collective progress can be made. But due to the awkward nature of talking about porn, such a collective sentiment is likely to never happen.

**How do we overcome failing?**
To succeed in escaping from PMO, you need to have a fundamental paradigm shift in your mind. Your mental paradigm is your framework of concepts that dictate your outlook on the world and your abilities. This is a broader control of the mind, through mindfulness and an understanding of neuroplasticity. The user that leaves the trap forever needs to understand these ideas.

"But why do some people quit without issue?"

We will touch on this more in the neuroplasticity section, but our initial success (if we do not learn the concepts detailed above) is based on pure chance. Throughout our childhood, we made conclusions based upon events, and these fundamental concepts build who we are as a person. These concepts have an effect on our ability to observe our reactions, which in turn, effect our ability to leave addictions. However, do not complain. As the lessons you will learn to leave the addiction will be worth even more than just the initial benefit of leaving PMO itself.

## False Incentives
Be aware not base your reasoning for quitting on any false incentives. Some of us may want to quit to appease our friends, to make our partners happier, or to become more disciplined. Even though these are great vessels to discover nofap, these incentives give the perfect excuse for us to relapse when we are in negative emotions.

- "I don't care what my friend thinks, it is not a big deal anyway"
- "She is already happy, it really is not that bad"
- "I can just do it less and I can still be disciplined"

False incentives provide the ammo to fuel your brains' defense mechanisms. As a response to what our brains interpret as a threat, we have some key reactions. We dismiss opposing views and we make illogical justifications and excuses for our own actions. Defense mechanisms are what your brain uses when you are in a reactionary state, so instead of having a false incentive, you should have an incentive grounded in yourself.

Forget the initial incentive for being interested or wanting to quit. Make the understanding now (and continue to as you learn) that porn and masturbation has no benefit to us. We may be thinking that this statement is untrue as we imagine what we receive as pleasure; we imagine the reward we get after using, but this is just another way that defense mechanisms have shown themselves.

**Porn is not valuable because it impaires your ability to think, to find freedom, and to function to your full potential.**

Do not quit for anybody else, quit for yourself.

## Important Notes About The Book
We do not drive a car on the highway without learning how to drive first. We do not fly a plane, or do other activities that require knowledge to complete before learning how to first. Therefore, we must also not quit porn or masturbation before making the conscious decision to quit first.

**It is your choice to if you would like to keep using porn/mo while reading the book.**

This advice may seem counter-intuitive, but really, it is not. Until you finish, you have no inclination to stop. Until the end of the book, if you feel like using, use, if you feel like not doing it, do not do it.

**Another important message is to read to the end.**

It breaks my heart to have the knowledge that people will only read part-way through this book. I want everybody to stop struggling, to stop fighting themselves, and to gain a higher level of control over their lives. Make it your most important goal, to read this book fully without distractions, and make it an importance to read at a pace where you truly understand, so do not skim, to truly come to an understanding.

Your conscious intention to do something increases your brain's ability to wire in new ideas. It is my wish that with your conscious intention to learn the ideas expressed here, they will make a positive and valuable contribution to how you think, the actions you take, and the things you achieve.