Leaving PMO provides many benefits and positives, as detailed in the introduction. These positives come from the changes in our neurochemistry and also our ability to control our reaction to emotions. However, technically, leaving PMO has no positives - it is just the removal of negatives.

When someone stops having a flu, they do not think that stopping having a flu had great benefits. Instead, they understand that it is an end of negatives - the flu was the cause of the grievence - you would not purposely get a flu just to feel the relief of it leaving again. PMO is the same way. We do not notice this, as the changes are slow and gradual, but porn has ever increasing negative and unproductive effects on our lives, as dopamine desensetization requires us to up our usage and compulsion. Therefore, when leaving these negatives, we can expect marvellous changes and improvements in our lives and outlook.

Do not make the mistake of normalizing masturbation. Because we have done it for so long, we find it hard to relate to when we didn't, and most use language to suggest benefits or that leaving PMO is not the normal. While in a societal sense, it may be the 'norm', in a bodily sense, it is not natural. Naturally, nobody has urges to watch lewd video clips as a reaction to emotion. Naturally, nobody tries to escape anxiety and fear by tricking our bodies into connections to partners we will never know. Porn is not natural and never will be. Masturbation too, has been around for a while, but on its own, it still drains your energy, and is just another outlet of hypersexualization.

Therefore make this key understanding - **The benefits of nofap are not direct benefits, but are just the end of negatives.**

## Neurochemical Changes Through PMO And MO
Any doubt of the negatives come from the nature of addiction. It happens slowly. If in one day, you went back to what you felt like before you started, the difference would be more apparent. This is the 'boiling frog' analogy.

One of the most provelant problems that porn creates is anxiety. First of all, it has been proven that porn lessens testosterone levels, which in turn lowers confidence. It also makes you less insentivised to be social (through dopamine culling) which in turn amounts to anxiety.

Another reason that porn is unproductive comes from dopamine desensatization. When we recieve dopamine in abnormally large amounts, our bodies remove receptors to account for the unusual levels. This seems fine, however it effects all other activities, not just porn.

Dopamine desensatization lowers your incentive to do life's tasks that that seem less interesting. In a less bad example, this may cause a porn user to want to read less books, watch more mundane content, play more games, go outside less, not work out etc. In a very bad example, it may cause a user to do vital things less such as eating, taking care of personal health, making efforts with friends, etc.

The interesting thing about dopamine is that most believe dopamine to be a pleasure chemical, **but it is not.** Dopamine is simply an anticipation chemical. It is the thing that provides reason to do things. This is why, some of the time you are really against doing something but then when somebody forces you to do it, you enjoy it. Even through dopamine desensatization, the "reward" (which is opiods) stays the same; it is only the anticipation and desire that changes.

Dopamine desensatization has unmeasurable but damaging effects. It can cause life to be less fufilling, less meaningful. When the small things in life are not incentivised or done happily, life becomes much more dull and mundane. This happens over time, but is one of the most sad effects of porn.

When the dopamine receptors start to become regulated again, it makes activities that previously could have been boring (such as reading a book), more enjoyable / easy to do.

A frequent skydiver can feel anhedonia (the inability to experience pleasure) in the rest of their life. This is the same for a porn user or a cocaine user, because these are all high dopamine activities.

Thus the pursuit of intense pleasure (hedonism), ironically, leads to the loss of it (anhedonia). Your brain is desensitized to the natural highs of life – talking, smiling, learning, working, nature, exercise, etc. don’t feel “high” like they should.

It’s like your life is in grayscale, instead of color, and unfortunately you don’t realize it. This is why quitting feels amazing, after any withdrawals are over. Your brain’s dopamine receptors will heal and reverse their desensitization.

Increased brain fog is another effect that porn creates. Porn lowers brain chemicals (acetylcholine) vital in cognitive functioning. This can make active users feel like they are less able to actively function than before (however not many people make this realization because this happens slowly). In my personal experience, it felt like being fully awake but half asleep. From personal experience, it makes you as interesting as a blank piece of paper.

Another negative porn creates is depressive symptoms. Alternations and malfunctions in the dopaminergic (dopamine) system have been shown to happen more in cases of depressive disorders. Removal from PMO viewing regulates these malfunctioning pathways.

Another negative porn creates is porn-induced erectile dysfunction. A lot of you will not have this experience, but porn has been proven to be a causing factor in erectile dysfunction, making it difficult for partners to have sex because of the inability to perform. This is caused through the desensatization to real life stimuli and the reliance on high-speed browsing and instant access to thousands of "partners".

The points talked about above are mostly specific to porn itself. Talking about masturbation, it should be understood that it triggers the same pathways that porn does, and for people that want to leave porn but still want to masturbate, it activates the same neural pathways that lead to porn use, so it should be treated the same. All effects of masturbation are compounded by porn.

The main negative of masturbation (and porn on top) is that it drains your energy. It takes your body a lot of resources to create sperm and when it is released on a regular basis, the body has to compensate for the lack of resources, and it uses energy to do so. In a sense, it is your "life energy", and you trade part of your own life to create another. The issue with this, is that for people that masturbate on a regular basis, they have less energy in general. Effects can mean that users feel sleepy often, they cannot sleep below 8-9 hours a night without feeling bad, they look like they had a bad night of sleep even though they slept enough hours, and productivity is harder to do.

Another negative of masturbation and porn is that it is a large waste of time. The amount of time spent seeking and searching for the perfect clip and masturbating itself takes a considerable amount of time, meaning that sleep may be sacrificed, or other activities may be put off. When people stop using PMO, they are often shocked at how much time they have, and that is also why they should change their lifestyle so that PMO has no place.

There are also more anecdotal (but consistently shown) negatives to PMO. PMO can create more acne and spots, it can lessen hair growth (and can cause it to recede), it can cause users to become gay or LGBT when they had no previous interest (just through hypersexualization), increased objectification of the other sex, more self-control and more. People that have left have shown consistent improvements across these things.

However, I want you to understand, that no matter how many negatives of porn (or positives of leaving) that you know of, no matter how many studies you research, no matter how many books you read, no matter how many conversations you have about why porn is bad, **it will not help you in leaving.**

In the case of porn, this fundemental delusion and brainwashing must be addressed, and you must come to an understanding about the nature of PMO and addiction to be set free. Freedom only comes from truth. People that do "porn diets" or challenges will never be free.

Freedom is what you are really searching for. Freedom to do things, and freedom from things. When such prescriptions such as "porn diets" are handed out, they will never provide freedom, because they are prescriptions, not cures.

Another element of PMO to be considered is out reasoning for doing it. We think it "feels good", and that is why most people say that they do it. But in actuality, it is temporary freedom from negatives. Yes, there is an increase in opiods on orgasm, but it acts as a temporary peace. It goes away, so users come back again and again trying to see the same glimpse of peace and freedom from their problems - but time and time again they come back to the real world. Only if they knew, if they could be set free from such a cycle that they would attain true peace - because porn created the disturbance in the first place.

We also would not care about PMO if there was no dopamine incentive to act. Also, do not ignore that the "reward" in PMO is much less than with a loving, and sincere partner who you value.

Porn presents itself wrapped up like a gift. Therefore, you must have the humility and sincerity to challenge your own previous views, understandings and beliefs.

## Intro To Brainwashing
Brainwashing seems like a strong word, but once you realize the scope of PMO and how much it is promoted, you will understand that the word is appropriate.

Understanding brainwashing requires us to first examine the powerful effects of supernormal stimulus. Our brains are simply are not prepared for the existence of an 'online harem', allowing us to flick through more potential mates in fifteen minutes than our ancestors had in several lifetimes.

There's been much misguided advice and scare tactics in the past (like the saying that masturbation will make you blind) that really overdid it. Misconceptions like these were right to be ignored, but in the process, the baby has been thrown out with the bath water. From our earliest years, our subconcious minds are bombarded by sexual messages and imagery, in all types of media, loaded with induendo. At it's core, the fundemental message implied is that "sex and sexual gratification is the most precious thing on this earth". It may seem ridiculuous, but think about the end of most films or TV shows. Think about the popular hip-hop and rap videos of our time. Think about the advertisements and society as a whole. They perpetuate this idea, that instead of love, bodily gratification is the most important desire you should hold. This impact does not register in our concious minds, but our subconcious mind absorbs it and builds pathways based upon it.

## Scientific Reasoning
There are a whole host of publicity in the other direction, supporting the fact that using porn and masturbation has detrimental effects on your health and wellbeing. There are detailed and reviewed studies on the effects of porn (such as YourBrainOnPorn) and other internet subcultures, however, these are not enough to rid the mind of the brainwashing, and they are never enough reasoning to make the user quit.

**This is because your brain does not care about negatives when it is in a reactionary state; it reacts to emotions through the pathways you have used the most.**

You would think that in knowledge of all the negatives that PMO provides, including depression, anxiety, PIED, and others, that it would be easy to quit. But then thinking about it, for other aspects in our lives, just knowing the negatives of an action is not enough to quit. A lot of us consume high sugar foods and unhealthy foods in ful knowledge of it's destructive nature. A lot of us use alcohol or drugs, and perform other harmful activities in full knowledge of their nature. **The reason we keep using in knowledge of negatives is lack of mental control to emotions.**