To be able to leave porn and masturbation, you must first acknowledge it as a problem. Even if the negative effects may not be apparent, it is because they happen slowly over time. You must understand that PMO is an addiction and not a habit.

You can break habits with enough mental focus and will. Think about it - if you have a habit of eating junk food, with enough intrinsic motivation, you can easily get into healthier eating habits. A habit is exactly this - something you do that is very regular and hard to get out of, but you have the ability to if you have the desire.

On the other hand, there are addictions. Addictions present themselves as habits, because on a surface level they are. However, the key difference with an addiction is that you cannot leave an addiction through motivation, willpower or knowledge of negatives. Addiction is when you cannot leave an occurance, even if you have every reason to, as if you have no control of yourself. This is a key distinction, because therefore this means that we cannot apply the same logic used for leaving habits to leaving addictions.

You can cut down how much you use habits, but not how much you use PMO - otherwise you are effectively edging by taking breaks and fueling your addiction further, without knowing.

**Common misconception**
There is a common misconception regarding your part in still being a user. While you are not responsible for getting into the trap, you need to take accountability for continuing to make the decision of still being in the trap. You may try to push off this responsibility to to the ones that introduced you to the trap, but take full ownership, to in turn, take full control.

Also do not make the excuse of calling yourself an *addict*. Even if you are addicted, calling yourself an *addict* creates a subconscious belief that because you are inherintly an addict it cannot be changed. Do not make the mistake of trying to diagnose yourself into avoiding responsibility. You cam change being addicted, but calling yourself an addict is limiting. Take accountability and take control.

## Extreme Ownership
To fix a problem, you first must take ownership of it, and we must apply this logic to PMO addiction. Most of us could pass the blame to many other people. The 'harem' sites that promote the content to us at young ages; the person that recommended we watch porn; the people that made PMO seem like the norm; and these are all valid examples.

Even if we have valid reasons to attribute our problem to the people that caused it, if we do so it means that we remove our own responsibility for fixing the problem, and it means no progress can be made.

Therefore you need to take **extreme ownership** of the addiction. You need to take all the responsibility onto yourself, and you must hold yourself accountable, even if the problem is not your fault. By doing this, this will then allow you to find a solution to the problem, as by taking ownership, you take the responsibility to fix the problem rather than waiting for somebody else to fix it.

It is easy to hate the people that produce pornography content, and it is easy to hate the women or men that participate in the content. However, hate will never provide the solution to your addiction. Yes, we should definitely hold them accountable, but do not direct your anger and hate towards those that fueled your addiction - instead, funnel anger towards your negative mental schemas and mental pathways that continue to pedal addiction to PMO.