## The Sinister Trap
The trap comes in two parts. There is porn, and there is masturbation. Porn is what most people talk about being bad, however, both porn and masturbation are negative sums, and they are so intertwined that for most, you cannot leave one without leaving the other. And even if you can use masturbation on its own without porn, there is no point to it, because you can instead use that energy for sexual transmutation, to better things.

**Hypersexualization Definition `The hyperactive oversexualization that comes from porn and fast-speed innuendo`**

Porn and hypersexualization influence us from a young age. Most of us hear about porn / sexual content through social media on an reocurring basis. This contant referring to these 'normal' activities make the non-user have a novel curiosity of what everyone is talking about, which will inevitably lead them to becoming a user.

Internet porn works through hijacking natural reward mechanisms designed to keep you reproducing for as long as possible. Porn's instant and highly accessible form keeps the brain's rewrad mechanism producing dopamine for significantly longer than normally possible. Scientifically, this is called the Coolidge effect, which you might already have heard of. This effect is present in many animals, but in nature, after having real sex with a partner you are satisfied and satiated. However, with internet porn's nature, you can browse through millions of online 'partners' meaning that your brain goes into overload and it overloads your natural limiter.

Dopamine is the neurotransmitter associated with feelings of wanting/seeking, with the actual feeling of pleasure produced by opiods. Dopamine is what makes you want to do something. Dopamine makes you want to start an activity in search of it's potential reward. The big problem we run into here, is that because porn overloads your dopamine sensors to such a high level, your brain automatically trims your dopamine receptors to regulate your neurochemicals. This will make smaller tasks seem less attractive because there seems to be a low reward as you are desensatized to the reward. Nominal amounts of dopamine produced by natural rewrads simply don't compare to pornography and aren't as efficiently absorbed by the decreased receptors, leading you into feeling more stressed, irratated, and directionless than before.

**Dopamine desensatization effects (examples)**
- Less incentivised to make general efforts
- Harder to read books
- Harder to be creative (artistic, coding, etc)
- More incentivised to play games and to watch mundane content (YouTube, TikTok etc)
- Harder to think clearly as it seems there is not as much reward thinking about stuff as watching porn

Dopamine is also released in response to novelty. With a seemingly infinite amount of porn available, this floods the limbic system (mental reward circuit), so the first time you see porn you act and masturbate, triggering another flood of opiods. Incentivised to get what your brain thinks is a reward again, it saves this mental pathway (like a script) for easy recall, and it strengthens these neural pathways every time you use again, through a chemical called DeltaFosB. Basically, every time you use porn it becomes even more automatic because your brain strengthens the mental pathways to using, becoming a self-feeding cycle.

**Pangs Definition - `Reminders to watch porn or to masturbate by the brain`**

A fleeting sense of security is all that's needed to get through a rough spot in life, but will your desensatized brain be able to catch that drop of destresser that a non-user's brain is able to use? Dopamine flooding acts like a quick acting drug, falling quickly and inducing withdrawl pangs. Many illusioned users have the idea that these 'pangs' are negative effects when trying or being forced to stop. However, these thoughs are mental because they are deprived of their 'pleasure' and in reality, these 'pangs' are just the remaining effects of the neural pathways that had been left from porn.

The actual chemical withdrawl from PMO is so subtle that it is mostly undetectable. There is no physical pain, and the only bodily thing you feel is the feeling that something seems missing. This happens because you replaced your time that was previously mundane tasks and porn. However, after leaving PMO it feels like you have so much more time because previously you may have just filled in your time with PMO rather than your actual interests, making you become more boring. This is not a negative however; we will talk more about boredom later, but put some thought into what you enjoy doing, what your responsibilites are, etc, and you can put your time into those things that truly benefit you as a whole, rather than mundane activities that only reward with dopamine. Find what truly benefits you. (Btw we will go more into emotions and reactions in next few chapters).

Another important note is the actual nature of why you use PMO on a reocurring basis. You know the feeling when a random car in the street has been beeping all day - or some other minor persistent aggravation - then it suddenly stops and marvellous feelings of peace and tranquility wash over you? This is not really peace, but just the end of an aggravation. PMO is the same as this. People percieve porn and fapping as 'relaxing', and they use it when they are anxious or sad, because they believe it will help. However, porn provides no relaxation, it only temporarily removes the nudges to have another session, until enough time passes for your body to believe you require dopamine again. You can also use these times of reminder for positive reinforcement, which we will talk about later, but it is basically saying "I am so glad I no longer have to follow these nudges for such an empty 'pleasure' ".

After having a session and waiting for some days, we start having withdrawl 'pangs', which are not physical pain, just a mental nudge that we should PMO. As talked about earlier, these are repeated affirmations to the subconscious that PMO is beneficial, even if you know fully that porn and masturbation has no benefit to you, and it only has negatives. However, these small nudges to the subconscious eventually translates the thought into an impulse of its physical equivilent by the most practical method available. This shows the importance of recognising these thoughts and emotions, and being able to enter an observational state rather than a reactionary state through introspection and medatation.

## Defense Mechanisms
Something notable that your brain automatically does when it percieves it's 'pleasure' threatened is the use of defense mechanisms to try to excuse still using PMO. Defense mechanisms are your brains way of trying to shut out a percieved threat, even if it means being ignorant of the truth.

Here are the five parts of defense mechanisms:
1. Dismissal
2. Justification
3. Denial And Offense
4. Illusion Of Reward
5. Fear Of The Alternative

It is sad because we very commonly do not notice these defense mechanisms and they can make us arrogant and ignorant to the truth. Imagine yourself as somebody that somebody else is trying to convince PMO as bad to, however you are just justifying with excuses that are selective and flawed.

**Dismissal**
Being confronted by a differing opinion is threatening to the primitive brain. For example, it could mean that our intellect is being questioned. We want to avoid such a thing, because it puts into question our ability to make a sound opinion, and it require us to admit something uncomfortable which we try to avoid. We filter incoming information, we ignore advice from other perspectives, and we reject information to do this.

**Justification**
This is a big one. Users who are in the trap actively try to justify themselves being addicted, but the sad reality is that they really believe that the negative belief is a protection. You can unrationally justify anything, and it is done using excuses, selective rationalization and lying. These are the most common causes of justification. Observe how you unrationally try to justify things when you become uncomfortable or reactive to emotion.

**Denial and offense**
If we cannot justify an activity in any means we see possible, we also just deny the other person's viewpoint without opening ourselves up to the possibility that we are wrong. We put up our defenses in fear of losing power and authority, we attack and label others as the enemy, an we project our own negative qualities onto others to do this. Do not be so quick to label someone as your enemy and to put up your defenses. Seek their intention, and live for *truth* not security.

**Illusion of reward**
Illusion of reward often represents itself in the form of procrastination. We fool ourselves into ignoring what we will have to deal with later by believing that our detrimental actions may cause a detrimental relief. We may also postpone the challenging or stressful thing to try to avoid it. Lastly, we may attribute a positive expectation to a detrimental action, believing this in ignorance. Recognise where you think you can have a temporary 'relief' and where you believe a truly negative action to have any benefit, and challenge those beliefs.

**Fear of the alternative**
The final part of defense mechanisms is fear of the alternative. We fear the possibility of having no worth due to our potentially flawed viewpoints so we try to avoid believing the alternative. In our nature, we have a desire for this validation, so we try to avoid changing beliefs, as we believe what we say has more value. However, this is false protection - our negative beliefs just act as a barrier, stopping us from looking for more positive beliefs.

These defense mechanisms are used to avoid something your primitive brain percieves as negative or a threat. However, when you become aware of these reactions, then you have the power to acknowledge the flaws in your logic, and you can follow your own internal guidance system. Feel free to read this section on defense mechanisms again if you want to get a better understanding.


## The Dance Around The Red Line
Porn users constantly filter what they percieve to be acceptable and not acceptable when they watch the media. They focus on the parts of content which they are attracted to the most, and they limit their curiosity to what they deem to be too weird or disgusting. Some users only try to watch the 'soft stuff', or they try to limit themselves to a specific genre. The reason they do this is because they are consciously or subconsciously fearful of the negative effects that watching the 'forbidden' content. Even though they may illusion themselves into believing porn to be beneficial, some part of them still partly understands the reality.

If one day, the user could not get their normal type of pornography, and there was only the 'weird' or 'unsafe' genre, do you think they would stop having a session? No! The brain does not really care what you fap to, it is just the seek-and-search of novelty that fuels this. To begin with, if they only had the choice of 'unsafe' porn they may be disgusted or unnerved, but only after a few sessions, it would quickly become the normal. What once was a 'forbidden' genre or what once they would have found disgusting, is now their new normal and they feel like they are not satisfied without using to that genre. This is just part of the effects of dopamine desensatization - the old content seems mundane to more interesting and 'daring' content, fueling the desensatization even more.

The reason why most of users continue using is because although they may know the disadvantages outweight the advantages, they still have the illusion that there is something in porn that we genuinly enjoy or benefit from. We may enjoy relieving the withdrawl pangs that PMO creates, but as explained previously, this is just the end of an aggravation, rather than a real peace. Surely it would feel so much nicer to skip this whole cycle and to not keep illusioning ourselves!

Reffering back to the last defense mechanism, porn and masturbation presents itself as a 'savior'. A solution for any bad day, a measure for any negative emotions or thoughts. This suggestion is the core of how PMO works. Masturbating is purely a response to emotion, nothing else, nothing more. If a lack of dopamine due to a break in usage creates negative emotion, and then you react to that negative emotion by using PMO, then you feed straight back into the trap - that its circular, self-feeding nature. However, we have the power to stop this, through the control and acknowledgement of our negative emotions.

## The Smoker's Analogy
A good analogy is that of the cigarette smoker. If they went ten hours of the day without a cigarette they’d be tearing their hair out, but many smokers will buy a new car and refrain from smoking in it. Many will visit theatres, supermarkets, churches and being unable to smoke causes them no problems. Even on trains and airplanes there have been no riots. Smokers are almost pleased for someone or something to stop them smoking.

Users will automatically refrain from using internet porn in their parents’ home during family gatherings and other events with little discomfort. In fact, most users have extended periods during which they abstain without effort. The neurological little monster is easy to cope with even when you’re still addicted. There are millions of users who remain casual users all their lives and they’re just as addicted as the heavy user. There are even heavy users who’ve kicked the addiction but have an occasional peek, greasing the water slide to be ridden down at the next dip in mood.

As said previously the actual porn addiction isn’t the main problem, simply acting as a catalyst in keeping our minds confused over the real problem – brainwashing. Don’t think the bad effects of internet porn are exaggerated however, if anything they’re sadly understated. Occasionally, rumours circulate that the neuralpathways created are there for life, with the right mix of chance and stimulus sending you down the life ruining water slide again, but these are untrue. Our brains and bodies are miraculous machines, recovering within a matter of weeks. It’s never too late to stop!

A quick browse of online communities will show you people of all ages rebooting their (and their partners) lives. As with anything humans do some take it to the next level, practicing semen retention, Karezza and through differentiation of the sensory and propagative sides of sex make their partners happier than ever before. It may be of consolation to lifelong and heavy users that it’s just as easy for them to stop as casual users, and in a peculiar way it’s easier. The further it drags you down, the greater the relief. You can find the process of leaving enjoyable in knowledge that such a posion has been removed from your life.

## Casual Users
Casual users are a sad and pitiful example of somebody that most likely wants to leave the addiction, it is just that they are making excuses and are using other defense mechanisms to justify still being a user.

The 'casual user' is the person that says because of their infrequent PMO use, or gravity towards 'softcore material', then it must be alright, and it is not a problem. However, the casual user is just as illusioned as the active user, because they are still creating excuses to continue to use. Part of them understands that continuing to use PMO will have negative effects, so they try to implement a half-measure, trying to keep the 'benefits' of porn while minimizing the 'negatives'.

While on the surface level, this may seem like a good idea, it has unintended effects. The first, is making the conclusion that fapping has any 'benefit'. PMO creates negative effects, and it temporarily relieves them with every session, brainwashing us into believing that there is an actual reason to use PMO. Is there a valid reason why leaving a non-essential and damaging task is not a good idea? Also, the second unintended consequence is the user effectively edging through the gaps of PMO. When the user does not have the ability to use, they loathe and build up an excitement towards the next session, fueling the seek-and-search mechnism even more and adding to the addiction by giving a positive expectation to the detrimental action of using.

For the 'casual user', the simple answer is to just stop completely. Freedom from the cycle, and freedom from their own illusions. However, then they fear; fear of failure, and/or fear of leaving their crutch and 'pleasure'. But you have to understand that fear is the emotion that starts a relapse. Therefore, recognise that fear, and understand that these negative thoughts and schemas are the cause of all your suffering. By the way, do not misunderstand observation. Observation is not thinking about the emotion more, but it is a dissasociation from the negative schemas - they are not your true self.

## "Why Am I So Weird"
Frequent porn creates the need to seek-and-search for more interesting and new material. This cycle happens continuously throughout the life cycle of a PMO'er and if they keep crossing this 'red line', the material that they will have to use to get off will be a far cry from what they originally used. This is why things such as fetishes exist, because dopamine is released through seeking-and-searching, and the same clip won't satisfy.

For someone that just discovered PMO who stumbled accross these clips, it is common for them to be disgusted. Yet, a few years down the line, they will require the same clips to have a session.

This is the nature of desensatization and seeking-and-searching, and this can lead people to terrible places.

This can cause people to question their sexuality, this can cause people to fantisize about violence, it can even cause people to fetishize minors, or rape.

This seek-and-search accross the 'red line' (if not stopped) ends to these roads. Yet, the 'average' user will not believe that it could ever come to this. They are still attracted to the generic stuff right?

There is a lack of accountability to porn for these negative results, and it is common for people to become defensive at the thought that their number one activity has caused them to do these things.

However, freedom requires no seeking-and-searching. Freedom is truth.