Our true control of self comes from reactions. Our emotions are part of our nature, but what seperates the trained mind to the untrained mind is that there is a conscious choice of reaction. Living in direct result to emotion will not lead to freedom, so it is important we must understand how we interact with emotions and how we can control them.

Emotions are not 'bad'. The only thing that is 'bad' is when we do not control emotions. Do not fall into the trap of classifying everything as good or bad. Is is what we have learnt to do - a lot of the time we call things bad to suppease our ego. Instead, observe what is more beneficial and follow that.

The mind should be a servant, not a master.

When I say you want to be happy, what I’m actually saying is you want to find peace. We say peace _of_ mind, but what we really want is peace from mind.

The mind goes quiet during the moments of greatest pleasure.

During your moments of greatest pleasure—whether you’re doing a drug, having an orgasm, finding your edge kite-surfing, laughing with a friend or looking at an incredible sunset—your mind goes quiet. It calms down, and that voice in your head goes silent. You achieve a sense of awe, which you might also call beauty, bliss or joy. We are seeking this peace from mind - this freedom.

We can only find this peace from mind if we are freed from our restrictions and addictions. We all seek this. We all chase it. Deep down, what we’re actually looking for is peace _from_ mind.

Primitive pleasures are just momentary glimpses of what peace feels like. Yet quickly, we are reeled back into the never-ending chase for that same glimpse. When we let go of these dependencies, the real peace we have been searching for will start to show.

Somewhere along the way, the mind became a master. I’m not making the mind out to be an enemy. It’s a very useful tool. But somewhere along the way, it became uncontrollable. The mind became the master rather than a servant. So it must be trained.

## Introspection
Very important quote from earlier on in the book:

>Any impulse of thought which is repeatedly passed onto the subconscious mind is, finally, accepted and acted upon by the subconscious mind, which proceeds to translate that impulse into its physical equivilent by the most practical method available.

Before we continue into this chapter, I want you to acknowledge something very important. Do not prescriptionize anything here. Do not come to the conclusion that when bad thoughts come up you have to follow some checklist to avoid a bad outcome, that is not what this is. There is no how-to here. All you need is an understanding, nothing more.

Also when "look at the emotions" is said, this does not mean to be consumed by them, not at all. Somebody could say "I have looked at my emotions but nothing happened, I just felt worse". This is a misinterpretation.

When you observe yourself, it is wise to do so in a way where you simply acklowedge emotion. You do not care if it is good or bad. The understanding is that you have a control over reactions. Whether you realize it or not, every bad decision, every good decision, is your choice. You have this ability. Do not underestimate your own power.

This is also what extreme ownership is about. It is easy to blame others. Blame the porn industry. Blame the people that gave you bad advice. Blame your life circumstances. Blame your own brain. Blame the world. But all this blame will get you nowhere. You cannot change these external factors, so you must change internal factors. You must own the problem - even if it is "your fault" or not - to solve it.

An important part of self control is self reflection. Mindfulness gives us an extra layer of introspection which we can use to control our reactions to emotion, without automatically reacting in a negative manner; the ability to recognize a problem and to disassociate from the emotion, rather than being overpowered and pulled into negative thoughts and patterns.

Simply the acknowledgement of a problem in our subconscious often causes it to dissolve. Instead of our automatic reactions, we will look for solutions instead.

Your conclusions and reactions to emotion dictate your ability to change your life to a more uplifting experience, so being in control of such reactions is of a great importance. This is also the basis of stoicism (change the internal rather than external).

>Your reactions dictate your reality, and your reactions determine your mood. Your mood becomes your personality, and your personality determines your fate.

**What is mindfulness?** Mindfulness is the ability to control our reactions; the awareness of the processes in our brain and mind; the awareness of our personal behavior and thinking patterns. This purposeful dive into our own functioning allow us to move past roadblocks in our own life.

Mindfulness is not focusing on emotions. It is noticing those moments, and taking control of the wheel.

**What is introspection?** Introspection is the reflective examination of one's own beliefs, behaviors or motives; the examination and observation of one's own mental and emotional processes. Introspection requires humility, because you will understand that new beliefs and truths will take the place of old ones.

Introspection should happen naturally. It is easy to prescriptionize introspection, through dedicated times of thought. However, I understand introspection to be a subconscious effort, that stems from a genuine interest. Introspection will happen after you become aware of your reactions, bad habits, and self.

When we have fear, anxiety, and other negative emotions, our minds have built up protection mechanisms to try to avoid the loss of self-worth. A major part of this is that the rational and intellectual part of the brain drops activity - the focus is on our physical survival. This is why a true, deep understanding of the truth is neccesary to leave PMO. Freedom lies in both the deep understanding of truth to do with PMO and the ability to have mindfulness of emotions.

Another reaction to these emotions is we enter into a defensive mode. Mainly, these reactions consist of the following: Dismissal (ignorance and lack of humility), Justification (excuses, tunnel vision and lying), Denial (taking offense, labeling enemy, projection) and Fear of the alternative (safe-zone, no action, false protection).

You do not have to memorize these reactions or anything like that. You only need to be aware of the general scope of defense mechanisms. While providing what we see as security, they only limit the path to finding truth and attaining freedom. Because in nature, every trait when a person goes into defense is directly avoiding truth or possible alternative views. That is why having the humility to acknowledge that some of our views are unwise makes sense.

The last 'defense mechanism' that I have not mentioned yet is illusion of reward. This links in to PMO the most because it is the very way that we cling onto it and other bad patterns, even when we feel we understand how it does not benefit us.

One part of illusion of reward is relief. When in the moment of experiencing emotion, the intellectional part of our brain shuts off, and we see things in a simple nature. We have been trained to believe in releifs - the thought that our detrimental actions may cause temporary relief.

We see this throughout society as a whole. People drink after a bad day, they use porn after splitting up with their partner, they smoke when they get stressed. These detrimental habits and reactions propose themselves as reliefs - as something that can stop the negative emotion. However, what is clear to see from an outside perspective, is that all of these 'reliefs' are just momentary glimpses of peace. That is what all of these people are trying to get to. But the reality is that these negative 'reliefs' just suppress problems. Mindfulness is helpful because idenfifying emotion allows us to understand these reliefs never provide freedom.

People drink for their entire lives, they use porn or have many sex partners, to chase that glimpse of freedom and peace from their problems. However, none of these people will ever attain that freedom. This never-ending chase of these 'reliefs' will NEVER give you what you desire, which is peace. The only way to freedom from these problems is through understanding the truth of the problems; what they really are. In this sense, if emotions cause issues you must understand emotions in their nature. In that way, you can take control of the wheel.

Another aspect of defense mechanisms is postponing, or as commonly known, procrastination. In times where we hear a view contrary to our own, we do not want to face the challenging thing to defend our own ego. This is what procrastination all ties into: self-worth. When people have a low self-worth and confidence, they rely on defense mechanisms more. In arguments which are less strong (and ones where these people are afraid to talk about them), these defense mechanisms are usually employed, because they have a low self-worth. People with a high self-worth and confidence do not use these defense mechanisms as much. This is because even if they are wrong, they do not care - as it is one step closer to finding the truth.

You may then say "how do you become confident?". Any typical approach will lead to arrogance, which is easily detectable. True confidence comes from your self-worth. And self-worth comes from your ability to keep your own promises. In this sense, it may be wise to make less promises that you might not keep, and also you may want to place a high amount of importance on fufilling your promises, even in times of inconvenience.

Another part of illusion of reward is the act of attributing a positive expectation to a detrimental action. This, chemically, happens through dopamine. Dopamine acts as a anticipation chemical, not a pleasure one, and it if something gives a high amount of dopamine, it will seem more attractive no matter how much we understand it to be harmful. It is common for this positive expectation to exist for this detrimental action, because otherwise we will have to let go of the idea of any benefit.

We should understand that negative actions being seen as good is not what we really believe in, but it is just the effects of dopamine. This anticipation often makes people think about the action more and more. And a desire (tying in with the desire chapter) repeatadly passed to the subconscious actualizes itself in an impulse. If we do not want this impulse to happen, the nature of anticipation and the positive expectations of negative actions should be understood.

Tying back to earlier in this chapter, where talking about emotion, there is a common misconception. Some believe that emotions are bad; they believe that they should stop being emotional and that people (or women) are weak for being more emotional. This idea is toxic in the sense that it is trying to deny a part of human nature, and also the person preaching this message is lying - they are still controlled by their emotions.

Emotions are just part of our nature. Yes, there are 'good' and 'bad emotions, but emotions as a whole are neutral. They are a part of our human nature, which we should not demoize. We should not do this because trying to oppose part of our inherent nature is often unproductive. Instead of opposing emotions, we should instead think about our reactions to them. Having such a negative view of emotions also leads to fear. They fear that having some emotion is a bad sign, or some sign of weakness, however this is not the case. It is easy to fear emotions, but it is freeing to take control of the wheel and to change your reaction to them.

> By attributing your suffering to schemas, and negative 
neurological pathways, instead of your true being, you gain a position of power. If you do this however, you should still take full ownership of the problems - it is about changing your focus on solutions.

## Use Of Neuroplasticity
We can use neuroplasticity to our advantage because thinking and believing positive thoughts will strengthen those pathways which will mean we will think those thoughts more in the future.

Ever since we are born, we are building schemas about the world, others and ourselves. Norms, beliefs, habits, expectations, behavior patterns etc. That becomes our identity. In childhood, we often form beliefs about the world which are harmful and untrue, due to our reactions to experiences in that time. The mind is like a computer in the sense that you can input information, but unless it is processed to be valid, you will not know if what you believe in is based in truth or mistruth.

Finding negative schemas and moving past them through introspection can bring a great satisfaction to those limited by harmful conclusions made in the past. This is because our reactions are heavily reliant on our neural pathways and schemas, which are reinforced over time. Before this time, our actions have been decided by elements outside of our control, and our reactions have been based upon them. Your future self does not have to be determined by your past self.

How can you become free from these negative thoughts and processes? Simply by acknowledging they exist. When you notice that you are in a negative thinking pattern, you can make the understanding that this introspection creates new neural pathways, changing your state of mind and habits, reinforcing a greater control.

Habits (and addictions to an extent) are just neural pathways that have been strengthened over a period of time to where they become subconsciously automatic. They are the result of our own schemas and because we have thought them so many times, it takes no conscious effort to think them anymore. That is also why our lifestyle has to change so that PMO is not needed in any way.

Old patterns influence us, but we can decide to take a different action, to think different thoughts. If we become aware of the schema we can stop ourselves in the reaction of a negative thoughts and states.

Our negative beliefs mascaraed as protection - they provide a false sense of security and reward. It functions as a barrier, a protection against contrasting beliefs which threaten our ego, effectively stopping us from looking for positive beliefs. This ties into what was previously said around defense mechanisms. This is why the premise of leaving their crutch is so uncomfortable for so many - because their destructive actions present theirselves as beneficial.

**The ego's defensive mechanisms keep our beliefs in the same place, as a means of 'protection' while having nothing to do with reality.**

Ego is not bad, but a tool we can utilize to be productive, and to advance ourselves. To do this, we must approach every argument and thought with humility and sincerity, otherwise we will stay the same.

When we reinforce and think new thoughts more than previous ones, we strengthen the newer thoughts, and over time, the older pathways weaken and the pathways will eventually fade away. This happens when truth and understanding is found.

Soon enough, our automatic reaction will no longer be negative - the same situation no longer triggers the same mental pathway, and instead we follow a positive reaction, because we understand that identifying the moments where we can control our response helps us do it even more in the future, automatically.

This is the foundation for neuroplasticity. Over time (and with age), our beliefs become more static and we challenge them less, causing our beliefs to become deeper routed as automatic processes, including negative and positive reactions. Anyhow, even though such people commonly have less neuroplasticity than younger people, with enough new knowledge and desire to change, they can shift their mindset and neurological processes to have positive reactions. It is never too late to change, as we remain neuroplastic our whole life.

Catching ourselves in the middle of our negative reaction, and being self-aware, heavily changes our experience - it physically changes the brain and what schemas are triggered as reactions to events.

## Meditation (Mindfulness In The Right Brain)
You do not have to feel inclined to meditate just off of the following section. However if you do so, you must re-organize your lifestyle to allow it to fit in. It must also do it out of pure intrinsic interest and enjoyment, otherwise, do not do it.

Meditation (or in the important way I see it) is a way to increase our awareness and mindfulness in the current moment. It allows us to have a temporary time for the mind to become silent, which is a rare occurance. The most important part of meditation is noticing when you start to have thoughts. This can happen after some seconds into the thought, but when you realize that you are having these thoughts you can return back to the present.

If you would like to do it, it is simple: turn on a timer for an allocated period of time (5-15 minutes or what you like) and go to somewhere where you can find a lowish level of noise. If you cannot, wear earphones with no sound or something similar. Then, sit down (not laying down) with your back straight, and start to focus on some automatic process or sensation (such as touch, hearing, breath). No need to force these things, just observe and let them naturally occur. 

When you spot that you have become distracted from your focus, return back to the breath. Every time you realize you have become distracted, new pathways are formed in our mind that allow us to more easily recognize thoughts and emotions; this can help us control and react in ways we want to undesirable thoughts or emotions.

Mindfulness (right brain) is a useful practice to go alongside introspection (left brain), as logical and experiential processes go hand in hand to form the human experience. The end goal of mindfulness should be that it is no longer needed; it just happens automatically.

Again, you do not need to meditate, but if you would like to do so, you can integrate it into your lifestyle.

## Fear
Focusing on fear leads to a negative focus. A negative focus leads to us imagining a worst case scenario, which leads to more of the same emotions being produced. This self-feeding cycle is what builds up until people fail in whatever they are attempting. However, we know can control these reactions. When we feel fear and anxiety in such a manner, we rarely see the big picture, and so, we have a negative focus on events, and we project our negative attention onto the future, imagining the worse case scenario.

The thing is, these negative thoughts activate other negative mental pathways that are similar to it. These negative pathways cause us to fail in the very thing we are worrying about, in a very ironic sense. The person that is worrying and anxious about a job meeting is less likely to be successful than somebody that affirms confidence through self-trust and understanding.

When we are in a negative focus, we do not have access the immediate solutions to our problems, so we should not look for them. Instead, when we become aware of our reactions, we can be happy that we again, reinforced a new neurological pathway by acknowledging fear and controlling our response! Every time this happens over again, it will make it more automatic and natural, to the point where it becomes the new normal.

## Power
When we are in 'reacting mode' due to fear, we try to solve the problem by focusing on the negative. This can cause us to have negative thoughts in spite of how truthful they are.

We can avoid these negative thoughts by becoming mindful of our emotions. We can be aware that we can create new neural pathways, which replace the older ones we dislike. In the moment, if for some reason you are fearful, you can disassociate from the fear, and realize that it is merely an automatic reaction, trying to keep you safe but failing to do so. By observing these emotions in a higher sense of self, you can redirect these thoughts to emphasize new pathways, instead of following the negative pathways.

Do not follow some bullet-point checklist of things to do when you get a negative thought. That just ties into the previous section on prescriptions. Emotions are an experience, they are artistic and they are not mechanical. With mechanical endeavours, prescriptions/how-to's work. The same operation provides the same result. But for artistic and experiencial endeavors, you must find the truth (the "cure") instead, through understanding, not routine.

In this state, we can make a big realization. In such a moment, **you** are creating pain for yourself, by not paying attention to your schemas, and instead letting the resulting emotions control your mind. It is easy to blame the mind, but you are in control of the mind. This is the reactive mode, which we have the power to stop. Act *greater* than your schemas. No matter how bad the situation is, we always have the power to move into the observing mode, disassociating from our emotions and taking control of our reactions, disengaging from auto-pilot.

> The problem does not lie in our true self, because our true self realizes these problems. Our problems lie in our schemas. Do not make the mistake to believe that you are powerless, as it is your schemas that are reinforcing negative reactions, and you have control of those schemas.

By attributing the *cause* of suffering to these schemas, and negative neurological pathways, instead of your true and higher self, you gain a position of power, as you control these schemas also.

If you receive a negative thought, focus or reaction, it is due to your schemas. Realize that your negative reactions are not your true being, but a separate part of your mind and being. Attribute the problem to the schema, and observe. Act greater, and take back control.