Talk about sexual transmutation here (tbf).
## Shifting Energy
You can take back the energy previously robbed from you - the same energy that flows through every cell in your body and the same energy that communicates with the ether. This energy on its own is nothing but potential. This potential must be harnessed to be helpful. Such energy creates a sense of depth in one's self. On the contrary, those without this aura appear with a lack of presence and depth. Energy is life; lacking it, you have been living less.

You must spend coins for them to be useful, and energy is the same. Coins, in a sense, are just another way of transferring energy, as is everything. This concept is not some abstract idea. This is just the nature of the life.

## Boredom
When a user becomes free, they are likely to have much more time available to do things. This is because #1 They have realized the emptiness and pointlessness of some of the previous activities. #2 They no longer need to browse through the material to try to get dopamine. #3 They develop a greater attraction to smaller but more fulfilling tasks.

This is a great thing. It is time that has not been utilized previously. It is your decision what to do with your newfound time.

I personally believe a good idea is finding something fun or relaxing that you gravitate towards naturally. For more productive periods, I believe it may be beneficial to define something you love to do that is also productive. Having both something to do when you want to be focused and something to do when relaxing (that is not a carnal desire) may be of benefit to you.

In general, you should not aim to be perfect. Aim to be **better**. That is what matters. This does not mean you should not have high aspirations, but avoid comparing yourself to some "perfect" version of yourself that does not even exist.

When you fill in your time, it is wise to follow principles outlined in this guide that can also be applied to other goals. Make what you want to do the easiest option, and make what you don't want to do the least attractive option. 

## Substitutes
Sometimes, people who leave PMO are inclined to substitute PMO with other things/bad habits. This only happens due to fear - fear of losing dopamine. However, there is no need to replace dopamine. Let it be rephrased that dopamine does not really affect how much you enjoy things while doing them - dopamine is rather your anticipation towards events. Therefore, you do not need to chase any carnal desires to receive joy - you can enjoy the small things in life if you stop making excuses around them, and naturally, over time, you will feel a natural gravitation toward the smaller parts of life that give it meaning.

There is no need to replace PMO with anything. Freedom requires no substitutes.

## Power
When we identify negative thinking patterns in motion, we can realize that we are actively building up positive neural pathways that increase our ability to control and make less impulsive decisions.

When this is not done, you are creating pain for yourself by not paying attention to your schemas. Act *greater*, as we have the power and the ability to take the wheel of our reactions.

## Curiosity Questions
Some of you may not understand why curiosity questions are unproductive. As hey, it is natural for us to ask questions about things to increase our intelligence (and this is how we learn new things). So what is the problem here?

I am talking about questions (about a process) that have no real purpose except for shifting emotions. Questions relating to when things are happening, how much of something will change, how many benefits will happen, how long you have to wait, is this a bad sign, etc.

These types of questions serve no real purpose except for increasing anticipation or anxiety. Some may say that anticipation and anxiety are the same emotion, but with a positive or negative connotation attached. The issue with these questions is that they make us worry for little reason except our curiosity.

It is in our nature to wait for things, to constantly ask when a parcel is coming, to ask how long some process will take. The reality of these questions is that the events will stay the same no matter how many of them you ask.

In relation to PMO, you may want to ask these questions because you are anticipating something positive, or you may ask these questions, becoming anxious if you believe something is a bad sign.

You have to realize that the only change these curiosity questions will make will be an undesirable and unproductive outcome - the emotions will feed right back into the neural pathways of PMO.

True peace and freedom lies in the understanding that you do not have to ask such questions as soon as the process is underway. You do not have to wait for freedom. You do not have to wait for peace. You should feel no need to ask such questions because the process is underway, and freedom is already yours. Freedom happens at a point where a process is understood in its entirety.

In a sense, the process is similar to a plant. When you stare at a plant, you will never see any change. To the eye, it stays the same. However, when you return the next day, it will have grown a little more. Yet, there is no need to compulsively ask when our plant will grow more. We can find peace in knowing that it will always grow.

## Reminders
At certain times you will be reminded about PMO. Through social media, random thoughts, when you may be bored and so on.

Some people really dislike the thought of this. They begin to fear the worst like it is some sort of bad sign that they are going to fail soon. Again, this is the trap of classifying things as good and bad.

When reminders occur naturally, it presents an opportunity. It is a moment in time where peace and freedom can be acknowledged. Over time, the old pathways will weaken, and your new natural will be peace. However, there is no reason to wait for anything. You can experience freedom in motion at all times.

Internal reminders are just remnants of the previous lifestyle that accounted for PMO. These are simply associations we made that incited us in the past to go on the chase for that glimpse of freedom but never being able to reach it. Peace comes when you realize the chase has ended.

Of course, you do not want to set up reminders intentionally. This ties into the lifestyle change that was talked about earlier. You may want to unfollow some social media pages, leave some communities with a negative influence, and even change where you take your phone and things like that. Do not feel forced to do any of these things; however, it would be of much benefit to change such lifestyle activities, as PMO no longer has a place in the picture.