Hey there, welcome the ppmo book. Through whatever way you found yourself here, maybe a recommendation, random link or any other method, I am happy you have made it here.

This book details the practice of leaving pornography and masturbation in favor of benefits - it is a guide to help you gain control over your life and to realize your potential. There is so much potential within yourself that can be unlocked once porn and masturbation are left, and with every cell in my body, I wish for you to complete this text, as I truly believe that it will change your life.

One understanding I want you to have is that you need to approach this in a way of understanding. This book is no how-to. Even though this is a 'guide', you should come to this as a way of understanding, not blind belief. I want you to make an understanding within yourself so that you can make your own decisions.

Also, before we get started, you should understand this: **DO NOT skip chapters.** This book has been crafted to help you quit without friction. If you miss critical information, you only have yourself to blame for any failures, so read everything as attentively as possible.

> Just for context, within this book, all instances of "nofap" are not referring to the NoFap subreddit or website but the practice of no-PMO/MO*. We do not condone spam of NoFap communities.

**PMO Definition: `Porn, Masturbation & Orgasm`** - When used in writing, PMO can also refer to fapping on its own (MO).

**User Definition: `Somebody that uses porn or masturbates.`**

## The Sad World Of Nofap
You might have heard of "nofap" before, but if you have not, most people hear about it in a similar way. Through a YouTube video that popped up as a suggestion, a link a friend sent us, or even a meme. If you have been linked this book, you must have been intregued to see what lies within. However, for those of you that have already heard of "nofap" you will likely know the sad truth around the "community".

> Every intelligent person knows that stimulation in excess, through alcoholic drink and narcotics, is a form of intemperance which destroys the vital organs of the body, including the brain. Not every person knows, however, that over indulgence in sex expression may become a habit as destructive and as detrimental to creative effort as narcotics or liquor.

Most people join the bandwagon of porn, as most people use it, so 'it must be fine', denouncing any evidence proving them wrong as they would rather be blissful in ignorance than living in truth. However, nothing can escape the fact that PMO has numerous adverse effects on the 'casual' user and 'heavy' user alike.

Negative effects span from low energy, low motivation, lessened ability to do work, lowered respect for women, depression, anxiety when interacting with others, porn-induced erectile dysfunction, relationship problems, acne, lowered testosterone, obsession with porn and fantasies, questioning sexuality despite no previous interest, and more. Many people believe nofap provides benefits, but it is actually just the negatives of fapping itself being removed.

These effects are not anecdotal and do not happen to a minority group. Instead, all users of porn suffer some degree of these symptoms, no matter if they realize it. Like the 'boiling frog', if a change occurs slowly and we are not knowledgeable, we are unlikely to notice it. Many problems in our personal lives could be directly or indirectly related to porn, yet we may be none the wiser. However, there is not much point in proving these negative effects (over again), as the neurochemical effects of porn are well understood. Just ask any ex-user that has been entirely freed from porn and masturbation. Unless they thought they would gain superpowers using nofap, the user would likely explain the positive changes they experienced after leaving.

So, let's return to the idea that we might have discovered nofap through a YouTube video. Hundreds of YouTubers have made videos on quitting porn and masturbation, with thousands of videos advising about quitting. However, there lies a sad truth between the lines that the average viewer is oblivious to - most advice given by these 'self-development' YouTubers/mentors has a meager success rate.

This is because people approach leaving PMO with a need for motivation. Some things can be broken with motivation, but havits/addictions cannot. Many "influencers" also use motivation as the primary cause for doing nofap. MOTIVATION IS TEMPORARY.

When you want to start something, often motivation is a good starting point, but motivation never leads to consistency. Nearly all popular advice uses motivation as the basis, which leads to the user having an incentive that quickly disappears, leading them right back into the trap. Sustainability comes from a genuine desire and intrinsic motivation to improve yourself. Therefore, motivation should not be used as a basis for leaving.

Think of most life problems. As humans, we can connect the dots and figure out a way to solve our problems. Some people are better at this than others, but all of us have some level of this ability. However, when it comes to addiction, our brain struggles to process it. It seems simple, just quit porn, right? Just explain all of the adverse effects of porn, the potential depression, the brain fog, the X, Y and Z. Yet, like most people starting nofap soon know, they realize how little control they have over themselves and their addiction.

The empty fulfillment that porn provides tricks the brain into an addiction, even knowing it is an illusion of experiencing sex. It is like one part of our brain knows we are fooling ourselves; the other part does not, like some sort of angel and devil on each shoulder. What once seems like a habit started through novel curiosity soon leads us into an addiction that causes us negatives.

Those who have tried and failed to quit porn or masturbation know the cycle. When we are about to decide to leave porn, we feel inspired, motivated, angry, excited, and have a wide range of emotions. As others have said, we are on the verge of getting "loads of benefits". But as time passes, our initial motivation runs out, and we become agitated. Soon enough, it seems like we lose control of ourselves and relapse. We relapse and fail despite our knowledge of negative effects, despite all our motivation at the beginning and every desire to leave. Unfortunately, most of those trying to quit PMO know this cycle too well.

Those who continuously fail may read the same book or strategy repeatedly without anything changing. My favorite quote that summarizes this well is from a villain in Far Cry 3. "The definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result". I am not insinuating that you are insane, but doing the same thing so many times with the same result is pointless. If you repeat something often to no avail, you misunderstand or miss a truth. Keep this in mind.

Let's look at the bigger picture. In communities where empty motivation and basic strategies are used against addiction, how can you expect these 'strategies' to work? PMO is an addiction, not a habit, because most can't leave even if they have every desire to do so. Most of the people giving advice online are giving failing advice whether they know it or not, and these advisories keep pushing 'solutions' that do not work. If these people giving advice used the same strategies in a professional setting, they would be shut down immediately!

To solve addiction, you need an understanding of some key mental concepts to gain **control** and **power** over your reactions and fate. Without full control and understanding of how these components relate to each other, we can never expect to help people quit porn once and for all, in larger numbers.

Addiction to porn and masturbation is a battle between components of the mind. The internal struggle for control is fought so hard yet lost so frequently, leaving many feeling hopeless. The logical part of our brain (the pre-frontal cortex, which represents our true self the most) has the desire to leave the addiction once and for all. But little do we know that the primitive part of our brain (the amygdala) is the part of the brain that blindly wants addiction to continue - so we must have an understanding of our brain to become free.

But why is PMO most annoying? - This is because it is embarrassing to talk about. Due to human nature and shame, it is often kept under wraps, getting progressively worse over the years, trapping the user for the rest of their lives. It is hard to approach friends and family about it because it would seem weird and incredibly awkward. This is the part of it that is most likely the worse. Those with addictions to smoking, food, drugs, and other instant pleasures can approach others and relatively easily find professionals to fix their issues. Societies can criticize the people producing what causes the addiction, and then collective progress can be made. But due to the awkward nature of talking about porn, such a collective sentiment is likely never to happen.

**How do we overcome failing?**
To succeed in escaping from PMO, you need to have a fundamental paradigm shift in your mind. Your mental paradigm is your framework of concepts that dictate your outlook on the world and your abilities - this is a broader control of the mind through mindfulness and an understanding of neuroplasticity. The user that leaves the trap forever needs to understand these ideas.

"But why do some people quit without issue?"

We will touch on this more in the neuroplasticity section, but our initial success (if we do not learn the described concepts) is based on pure chance. Throughout our childhood, we make conclusions based upon events, and these fundamental concepts build who we are as a person. These concepts affect our ability to observe our reactions, affecting our ability to leave addictions. However, do not complain. The lessons you will learn to leave the addiction will be worth even more than just the initial benefit of leaving PMO.

## False Incentives
Be aware not to base your reasoning for quitting on any false incentives. Some of us may want to quit to appease our friends, make our partners happier, or become more disciplined. Even though these are great vessels to discover nofap, these incentives give the perfect excuse for us to relapse when we are in negative emotions.

- "I don't care what my friend thinks; it is not a big deal anyway."
- "She is already happy. It really is not that bad."
- "I can just do it less, and I can still be disciplined."
- "I will just do it rarely."
- "I will just watch the 'soft stuff'."

False incentives provide the ammo to fuel your brain's defense mechanisms. As a response to what our brains interpret as a threat, we have some key reactions. We dismiss opposing views and make illogical justifications and excuses for our actions. Defense mechanisms are what your brain uses when you are in a reactionary state, so instead of having a false incentive, you should have an incentive grounded in yourself.

Forget the initial incentive for being interested or wanting to quit. Make the understanding now (and continue to as you learn) that porn and masturbation has no benefit to us. We may think this statement to be untrue as we imagine what we receive as pleasure and the reward we get after using, but this is just another way that defense mechanisms have shown themselves.

**Porn is not valuable because it impairs your ability to think, find freedom, and function to your full potential.**

Do not quit for anybody else. Quit for yourself.

## Important Note About The Book
We do not drive a car on the highway without learning how to drive first. We do not fly a plane or do other activities that require knowledge to complete before learning how to first. Therefore, we must also not quit porn or masturbation before consciously deciding to
**You can continue watching porn/fapping while reading the book.**

This advice may seem counter-intuitive, but really, it is not. Until you finish, you have no inclination to stop.
You should not quit watching porn or masturbating until you finish this book.

**Also, you should not ask any questions about this book before completing. They will likely be answered in the book.**

## How To Finish This Book
Many will not finish this book. They will lose motivation, and will forever be a victim to the porn trap until the day they die. This one drop in desire will result in the continous decline in enjoyment of living, when the cycle continues further. If you do not want this, make reading this book a priority.

Your conscious intention to do something increases your brain's ability to wire in new ideas. I wish that with your conscious choice to learn the ideas expressed here, they will make a positive and valuable contribution to how you think, the actions you take, and the things you achieve.

If you want to read this book, without getting stuck in the middle or procrastinating, make it your highest priority to read this book within a week.

It should be your upmost priority to fufill this promise - then it shall be done.